---
layout: post
title: Heir apparent!
---

Who is the next Ricky Ponting, Sachin Tendulkar, Brian Lara or Jacques Kallis? Growing up watching these magnificent players in the 1990s and much of 2000s was an unbelievable experience. It’s not that their respective teams didn’t have other good players, but just the price opponent teams put on their wickets made them a compelling watch. They were the blockbusters, batters whom the crowds tuned in to watch no matter what. They were the Most Fearsome, the Master Blaster, the Genius and the Rock. Watching them in action was a spectacle every fan wishes for.

So, in the modern day Cricket who commands similar respect against opponents? My pick would be Steve Smith, Virat Kohli, Kane Williamson and Joe Root. All of them are below 28 and already have the world at their feet. Three of them are captains and Joe Root looks like will be the next England captain. I would not say we have a like for like successor in terms of the way those greats batted. These modern maestros are different in their styles but are equally effective and easy to watch.

Viral Kohli is very much like Tendulkar having to shoulder the hopes and aspirations of a billion and seldom does he disappoint. When he first burst on the seam, he was brash, outspoken, emotional and a fiery character to say the least. He has grown into probably the best finisher the game has ever seen. His ability to steer the team home in a chase is very rare. The tougher the chase gets the more we see Kohli’s grit and clear thinking. I have no doubt he’ll break all of Sachin’s record in One Day Internationals and come very close to the Test records. And that is no mean feet. Sachin’s biggest strength was his longevity and his hunger for the game. It’s unfair to expect Kohli to play 200 test matches under the pressure the Indian public puts on it’s most iconic batsmen.

Kane Williamson is in a similar mould to Jacques Kallis. Probably has the best defensive technique in the game today. He has scored hundreds against rank tuners in India and against raging seam and swing on a green deck in South Africa. He looked at complete ease and miles ahead of his fellow batters in those innings. His batting just flows. Adapts very quickly to conditions like a chameleon, uses his wrist to great effect against quality spin and his soft hands to play down the ball when facing 150Ks. He also seems to have a very good Cricket brain. His captaincy in the World T20 this year was nothing short of genius. Surely he doesn’t fear taking risks and face up to the criticism when things go wrong. He is perhaps already the best batsman New Zealand has ever produced. I foresee him becoming a modern day great.

Steve Smith has a quirky technique which is mighty effective and at the top of the order takes the game to the opposition while averaging 60 having played close to 50 test matches much like Ponting. He’s fidgety, has a very pronounced movement before facing the ball to cover his stumps, looks like an LBW candidate but then he rarely misses the ball on middle stump. He makes the bowler bowl to his strengths and has over the years tightened his defensive technique and is very sure of bowls to leave outside off stump. He’s the best young batsman Australia have produced in a long time. He also plays spin better than any other Australian, only Michael Clarke would come close. He has a tough challenge in taking a very young Australian side forward as the captain of the team but I have no doubts he’ll turn the tides for Australia.   

Joe Root is predominantly a backfoot player and is a very good puller, hooker and cutter of the ball. But what is rare is how beautifully he play the cover-drives in addition to cross-batted shots that come naturally to him. He prefers to hang back but doesn’t get stuck there and when presented with the opportunity he brings out his vast array of shots. He is at equal ease playing T20 Cricket or Test Cricket. Doesn’t even look like he has to change much to switch between the formats. That’s how good he is. He became the core of the English batting even before he turned 24 much like Brian Lara. He has proved himself capable of handling the sub-continental conditions which very few other English batsmen before him can boost off. 

What separates once in a generation players from very good players is their ability to balance defense and attack. They don’t have that one single way which works for them. Depending on the situation they can adapt but right from the outset look to put the opponent team under pressure. The opposition knows they are in a contest and if they don’t get these players quickly enough it will soon be big trouble for them. There is no room for complacency when they are on the crease. They put a certain fear in the opposition which makes the Cricket great viewing. From what I have seen of Joe, Steve, Kane and Virat they truly are those rare gems, the once in a generation players.


