---
layout: post
title: Specializing vs Knowing it all!
---

Should I specialize in Machine Learning or Computer Vision or Computer Networks or Cryptography? You must have heard this being discussed around you if you have anything to do with Computer Science. This question is most significant when it comes to Master students in Computer Science. In your bachelors program no one expects you to specialize so you never really ask yourself where your real interest lies. But if you have chosen to pursue further studies it becomes a burning question. A question you must answer, if not for yourself but for your friends, family or for the person seated next to you in a flight who asks what do you study? The moment you say Master’s, the next question invariably will be, what do you specialize in? 

Choosing to pursue a Master’s program is not for any one reason. It is done if you want a higher paying job, change your current field you might have got stuck in, do some research in the field you are passionate about after having spend a fair few months breaking head against or for someone like me who wants to know what all exists out there. This last one is a real hard one to explain. So let me try. 

I chose to go for my Master’s program straight out of undergraduate school. I just knew I wanted to learn a lot more than I did. I had done a 6 months internship at a large multinational company that specializes in making desktop virtualization software. Working with the best of software engineers was a great experience and I learnt some really valuable stuff in those 6 months. So let me clarify this upfront if you have any such notion that pursuing a Master’s degree will make you more adept at Software development in the industry, from my limited experience, this is clearly not the case. Debugging through 500,000 lines of code, caring about the quality of the small piece of software you built, having the onus of not screwing up will only happen in the industry. Academia will rarely give you this real world experience. In fact, it’s not meant to. You go get a degree to make your fundamentals sound. Hardening your skills will happen on the job. So, coming back to the question of why I made this decision when I did. It was simple since I had the desire to know a lot more and explore Computer Science further, it was never a question of “Should I?” It was more of “When should I?”. Being fresh out of school, I hadn’t absolutely forgotten Linear Algebra, Discrete Math or Computer Networks. I figured, right now would be the best for me.

Now, after having made that decision. The battle with specialization started. I took a Machine Learning course, a Computer Architecture course and a Network Security course on Coursera. This was geared towards figuring out what am I really interested in? Is it Theory, Systems, Artificial Intelligence or an Interdisciplinary area like Robotics? Now you would ask what was I doing for those four years in school? I had never really questioned this. I had done Mobile application development, Web development, Open Source development, written a research paper comparing benefits of Offloading all computation to Cloud to make mobile phones cheaper. I was just having fun doing all of it. I felt privileged to have had the opportunity to learn and I was just doing that. Not knowing the state of the art, namely, Machine Learning, Big Data Analytics, Natural Language Processing, Virtual reality, just troubled me. I wanted to know it all but hadn’t yet done so.

I chose a program which didn’t need me to choose a specialization for the degree like most programs do. But this wasn’t what I wanted back then, it was more of an accident and I had just gotten lucky to land up this opportunity. I could further delay picking that one area.

Now, 15 months into my program, I still haven’t. What a confused soul, right? But I chose to differ. I have gradually accepted the idea of me being a generalist. There are some topics that I love more than others like distributed computing, security of computer networks, computational linguistics. But developing a small programming language in a proof assistant like <a href="https://coq.inria.fr/">Coq</a> or developing my first <a href="http://www.necter.social/">iPhone app</a> or an <a href="https://github.com/sagar-sinha/aladdin">Amazon Alexa skill</a> excites me as much, if not more. I’m still the one who wants to learn it all but with the knowledge and acceptance of it’s fine not to choose one. So, if you are having trouble picking the one, defer it, somewhere down the line you’ll know the right answer. If you find none but love doing what you do. It’s fine! 
